---
layout: post
title:  "This blog what am I doing?"
date: 2016-12-29
categories: random
---

{% newthought 'As a new blogger' %} with Jekyll, one of my first posts is required to be about setting up this blog itself. Jekyll, as most things developed by programmers, is super easy and wonderful and magic and like sweet ambrosia.

Overall it hasn’t been that bad of actually. Most of the guides are [pretty detailed](http://andybeger.com/2016/06/20/moving-from-wordpress-to-jekyll/), and walk you through most of the problems you might have.

This blog uses the [Tufte-Jekyll](https://github.com/clayh53/tufte-jekyll) theme, developed by Clay Harmon, which uses custom Liquid tags. I really like the Tufte style of formatting, largely because of the margin notes and figures, so this was the right place to start.

But, as this is my first time implementing a blog in Gitpages, I received this error after pushing my edited work.

{% maincolumn "assets/img/blogerror1.png" "Thanks my gitbubber" %}

This confused me, as I got the whole thing working locally{% sidenote "one" "I had to use ```bundle exec jekyll build``` and ```bundle exec jekyll serve -w```, due to Mac protecting Ruby something something? I'm ctrl-c ctrl-ving this" %}. However, after actually *reading* the documentation, I learned that I couldn't use any of the custom Liquid tags in Gitpages as a default. That's really annoying, as that was the whole point so I could use

```{{ '{% marginnote "one" "Look at this sweet ass-margin note" '}} %}```

But of course this was already solved by the Tufte-Jekyll theme if I had just read *that* documentation. The Rakefile solves this by doing some building stuff and making the site locally before pushing it to git pages{% sidenote "two" "Rakefiles are like makefiles which, as I'm not a software developer, I'm not used to in the first place." %}. But since I want this as my default page for the github.io, which needs to be on the ```master``` branch of the git thing because reasons, I had to edit the Rakefile so it would push the finished site to the ```master``` branch, and used a new branch randomly named ```servant``` to store my work.

Finally, after all of that hullabaloo, most of the css and html didn't display anyways. I had to edit the ```_config.yml``` file so that it fit with everything else I was doing.

Seems to work! I am not a web developer so this is all new and blegh to me, but the best way to learn is to debug what's broke.
